RESUMABLE: Require offset and length to match upon completion (#3463)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.md

### Length {#upload-length}

> The length of the representation data might not be known when starting the transfer, for example, because the representation is taken from a streaming source. The representation's length will, however, be known at the latest when the upload is complete.

Reviewer: This last sentence is untrue. The server can mark an upload as completed (I assume you meant "completed", not "complete") before the length is known.

Author: I'm not sure I understand. The length will always be known when the upload is complete (i.e. request with Upload-Complete: ?1 was fully received) because the full representation has been received at that point.

Reviewer: The server can send an early response with `Upload-Complete: ?1`, deeming the upload complete without a request being sent with `Upload-Complete: ?1`.

Author: In that case the upload is complete and the server learns the length of the transferred representation. No further data can be appended and the length is final.

Reviewer: But the client never finished transferring the representation, and it didn't communicate the length through either of the two length indicators this PR documents, so the server cannot know the full representation's length. Setting aside semantics though, the server implementation required to actually compute the length from a request discarded early seems useless and unnecessarily complex when the server no longer needs to be aware of the length. The server still won't necessarily know the length, and unlike for the 2 indicators, it isn't required to.

Reviewer 2: Can we just rephrase this as “when the client completes the upload”?

Author: > Can we just rephrase this as “when the client completes the upload”?

That's possible. Thinking out load, the consequence would be that if the server serves an early response, the upload either

- is completed and does not have a length, or
- is completed, but `offset < length`.

Both seem fine to me since the server stopped the upload early, so it's not unexpected that the upload is halted in such an intermittent state. Using the suggested phrasing would resolve the topic in a rather simple way, wouldn't it?

Reviewer: Yes, it would! (I swore I reacted to Guoye's comment with 👍 before, but it disappeared.)

Author: Changed this in 77c5b38a

> Despite this, a client SHOULD communicate the representation's length to the server as soon as it becomes known to aid with resource managament and facilitate early validation. There are two different ways for the client to indicate and for the server to discover the representation's length from requests for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}):

Reviewer: Nit: Just a typo.

```suggestion
Despite this, a client SHOULD communicate the representation's length to the server as soon as it becomes known to aid with resource management and facilitate early validation. There are two different ways for the client to indicate and for the server to discover the representation's length from requests for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}):
```

> 1. If the request includes the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true, the request content is the remaining representation data. The representation's length is then the sum of the current offset ({{upload-offset}}) and request content's length, which might be announced in the `Content-Length` header field.

Reviewer: Nit: This sounds better to me with an article here: "the sum of the X and _the_ Y".

```suggestion
1. If the request includes the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true, the request content is the remaining representation data. The representation's length is then the sum of the current offset ({{upload-offset}}) and the request content's length, which might be announced in the `Content-Length` header field.
```

2. The request can include the `Upload-Length` header field defined below.

The `Upload-Length` request and response header field is an Item Structured Header Field ({{STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). Its value is a non-negative Integer ({{Section 3.3.1 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}) and indicates the representation's length as a number of bytes. Other values MUST cause the entire header field to be ignored.

> If indicators (1) and (2) are both present in the same request, their indicated lengths MUST match. The representation's length, if known, MUST stay consistent across subsequent requests. A server can use the problem type {{PROBLEM}} of "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#inconsistent-representation-length" ({{inconsistent-length}}) in responses to indicate inconsistent length values.

Reviewer: At the end of this line, I don't know if it should say "length values" anymore since you removed the "indicated values" phrasing from earlier sentences. I would think "length indicators" is better, but then it says "to indicate inconsistent length indicators", which is repetitive. This may not matter, so feel free to disregard.

Author: ```suggestion
If indicators (1) and (2) are both present in the same request, their indicated lengths MUST match. The representation's length, if known, MUST stay consistent across subsequent requests. A server can use the problem type {{PROBLEM}} of "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#inconsistent-representation-length" ({{inconsistent-length}}) in responses to indicate inconsistent length indicators.
```

> If indicators (1) and (2) are both present in the same request, their indicated lengths MUST match. The representation's length, if known, MUST stay consistent across subsequent requests. A server can use the problem type {{PROBLEM}} of "https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#inconsistent-upload-length" ({{inconsistent-length}}) in responses to indicate inconsistent length indicators.

Reviewer: It says indicators (1) and (2) MUST match, but just within indicator (1), what if the content length doesn't match the `Content-Length` header? Perhaps we don't need to comment on that since RFC 9110 already [prohibits this](https://httpwg.org/specs/rfc9110.html#field.content-length):

> a sender MUST NOT forward a message with a Content-Length header field value that is known to be incorrect.

Author: I don't think we should include normative statements in this document about how messages with inaccurate Content-Length values ought to be handled. It's outside of this document's scope and overlaps with the version-specific details of HTTP. If I'm not mistaken, HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 consider messages with an inaccurate Content-Length as malformed.

Reviewer: That's what I figured, but just making sure.

The `Upload-Length` field can be used in response to an offset retrieval; see {{offset-retrieving-server}}.

> The server might not know the length until the upload is complete. Once the client attempts to complete the upload, the server MUST, after processing the request content, verify that the offset matches a previously recorded length value. If it does not, the server MUST reject the corresponding request, deactivate the upload resource, and reject further interaction with it.

Reviewer 2: Does “Upload-Length: 1000 and Upload-Complete: ?0” count as “attempts to complete the upload”?

Could we just say something like “final length must not change once it’s known”?

Author: > Does “Upload-Length: 1000 and Upload-Complete: ?0” count as “attempts to complete the upload”?

I wouldn't say so. With "attempting to complete the upload" I referred to sending a request with `Upload-Complete: ?1`

> Could we just say something like “final length must not change once it’s known”?

The spec already includes this. It says that the length indicated in subsequent requests must match. The problem is that the length is currently tied to the presence of either Upload-Length or Content-Length. So if the final request includes neither, no text exists that force the final representation size to match previous length values. A concrete example is this:

- Empty POST request with Upload-Length: 1000 and Upload-Complete: ?0
- PATCH request with Upload-Complete: ?1, no Content-Length, but 500 bytes of content

I think we could either
- add text to say that the length must be acurate if the upload is completed (what this PR tries to do), or
- say that a length is also recorded if the upload completes and it must be consist with previous length values.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer 2: Ah I see. I think we should
1. define the upload length to be the complete full length of the content upfront.
2. Then say it can be derived ahead of completion from the Upload-Length or Content-Length + complete.
3. Once it is known, it must not be changed.
4. Attempting to change it results in a certain error.

Author: That's a good approach. Thinking more about this made me realize that the upload length is just the representation's length. We can probably adjust the wording in this section to talk about the representation's length and how the server can discover it through Content-Length and Upload-Length. This would allow us to get rid of the duplication of representation length and the upload resource's recorded length and then we don't have to mention that they have to match in the end. Let me try that out ~~in a PR~~...

The `Upload-Complete` header field is set to true if the request content includes the entire representation data that the client intends to upload. This is also a requirement for transparently upgrading to resumable uploads from conventional uploads ({{upgrading-uploads}}).

> If the client knows the representation data's length, it SHOULD indicate the length in the request to help the server allocate necessary resources for the upload and provide early feedback if the representation violates a limit ({{upload-limit}}), as described in {{upload-length}}.

Reviewer: I assume this is (and has been) intentionally redundant with the same recommendation in the upload length section, for ease of reading/searching?

If so, we probably want to at least phrase "representation's length" consistently:

```suggestion
If the client knows the representation's length, it SHOULD indicate the length in the request to help the server allocate necessary resources for the upload and provide early feedback if the representation violates a limit ({{upload-limit}}), as described in {{upload-length}}.
```

If the `Upload-Complete` request header field is set to false, the client intends to transfer the representation over multiple requests. If the request content was fully processed, the server MUST include the `Location` response header field pointing to the upload resource and MUST include the `Upload-Limit` header field with the corresponding limits if existing. Servers are RECOMMENDED to use the `201 (Created)` status code.

> The server MUST record the representation's length according to {{upload-length}} if the `Upload-Length` or `Upload-Complete: ?1` header fields are included in the request.

Reviewer: I know this is an old clause, but what if the client or server fails? Does this account for that sufficiently? For example,

- if a client makes an `Upload-Complete: ?1` request with no `Content-Length` header that the server rejects after receiving only half its content,
- if the client makes a request with `Upload-Length` that has an invalid value for `Upload-Complete`,
- if the client's headers correctly indicate the length and go through to the server, but the body doesn't get sent due to the client losing connection,
- if the client indicates the length, but the server fails with a 5xx response and is unable to record the length.

Author: > * if a client makes an `Upload-Complete: ?1` request with no `Content-Length` header that the server rejects after receiving only half its content,
> * if the client makes a request with `Upload-Length` that has an invalid value for `Upload-Complete`,

Then the length is unknown.

> * if the client's headers correctly indicate the length and go through to the server, but the body doesn't get sent due to the client losing connection,
> * if the client indicates the length, but the server fails with a 5xx response and is unable to record the length.

The server can try to record the length based on the request header without the content, but if that process fails the length remains unknown.

In general, I don't think we have to go into every possible failure scenario in the text, as this makes it too verbose, rigid and restrictive. The document shouldn't be an implementation blueprint. It's good to think about these scenarios and it's great that you bring themup, but the document should focus on areas where interoperability matters. The examples you mentioned either reflect transient failures in the message exchange that can be recovered from using the resumption techniques, or are cases of the client emitting invalid messages, where the file upload will fail regardless of what we specify in the document.

Reviewer: I wasn't suggesting explicitly documenting these edge cases; I was only suggesting that the conditions under which the server is required to record the length are perhaps too restrictive. But if you think situations like the examples I gave are already naturally exempt from this requirement, then feel free to mark as resolved.

- MUST include the offset in the `Upload-Offset` header field ({{upload-offset}}),
- MUST include the `Upload-Complete` header field ({{upload-complete}}) indicating whether a final response was produced from processing the uploaded representation,

> - MUST include the representation's length in the `Upload-Length` header field if the client has supplied one through corresponding headers as described in ({{upload-length}}),

Reviewer: Why don't we just remove "through corresponding headers" since that could be misinterpreted as excluding the final request content length itself as a signal? I know you're referring to when `Upload-Complete: ?1` is present, but I don't think that header itself is what _supplies_ the representation's length. This previously referred to either `Upload-Length` or `Upload-Offset`+`Content-Length`, which actually did supply the length.

```suggestion
- MUST include the representation's length in the `Upload-Length` header field if the client has indicated one as described in ({{upload-length}}),
```

Author: There original phrasing has been chosen on purpose based on feedback from the previous Working Group Last Call (https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/3204). So let's keep that and just adjust it to use "representation's length".

```suggestion
- MUST include the representation's length in the `Upload-Length` header field, unless the client has not supplied one, by providing the corresponding headers as described in ({{upload-length}}),
```

Reviewer: Yeah, but that was before the representation's length was specified as being deduced from things other than headers. I don't think this phrasing is appropriate anymore. The reason that phrasing was chosen is because it clarifies under what circumstances the server must know the length. Citing the aforementioned indicators rather than "headers" should be equally sufficient.

If you disagree, I'd want to hear @LPardue's opinion on this before this is merged. (I don't consider my comment resolved, so if you're able to un-mark it as resolved, that would be nice so I don't have to start a new thread for this review.)

Author: How about this?

> - MUST include the representation's length in the `Upload-Length` header field, unless the server has not discovered the length through the mechanisms described in ({{upload-length}}),

Reviewer: This addresses _my_ problem, but to also address the point of the aforementioned PR, shouldn't it mention the client indicating the length rather than the server discovering it?

Author: Makes sense. I changed it to this in ab6bae66:

> - MUST include the representation's length in the `Upload-Length` header field, unless the client has not supplied the representation's length as described in ({{upload-length}}),

Let me know if you think this isn't accurate.

IANA is asked to register the following entry in the "HTTP Problem Types" registry:

Type URI:
: https://iana.org/assignments/http-problem-types#inconsistent-representation-length

Title:

> : Inconsistent Representation Length Values

Reviewer 2: Should we keep the problem type inconsistent-upload-length since the new name sounds like it might be more widely applicable?

We already defined upload length to be the representation’s length to be uploaded. I suspect most people are still confused about resource vs representation vs content.

Author: We can also keep the previous name 👍

Author: Reverted to `inconsistent-upload-length` in 1d8cc59d.
